README.md, before:

# Crypto Premium Regime Gating (Hiring Project)

This repository implements the v5 framework described in `AGENT.md` and the two notes:

- `Notice.pdf` (baseline: premium + stat-mech + regime gating)
- `Notice + Hawkes.pdf` (optional Hawkes contagion overlay)

## Scope selected from the hiring brief

This project combines:

- Stable coin analysis:
  - fair-value proxy of `USDT/USDC` spread via cross-asset replication
  - depeg detection flag (`delta_log`, consecutive windows)
  - dedicated on-chain validation feed (`onchain_proxy` from DefiLlama)
  - transmission into synthetic premium (`BTCUSDC` vs `BTCUSDT`)
- Premium analysis (robust estimation):
  - naive premium failure handling
  - robust smoothing + outlier events
  - regime detection (transient vs stress)
- Statistical mechanics features:
  - entropy `H_t`, temperature `T_t`, susceptibility `chi_t`
- Optional advanced method:
  - Hawkes branching ratio `n(t)` for stress contagion gating

## Data sources from the email

- Binance: [data.binance.vision](https://data.binance.vision/?prefix=data/)
- GateIO historical quotes: [gate.com developer docs](https://www.gate.com/developer/historical_quotes)
- Bybit historical data: [bybit history data](https://www.bybit.com/derivatives/en/history-data)
- OKX direct URLs (login bypass pattern):
  - trades: `https://www.okx.com/cdn/okex/traderecords/trades/monthly/YYYYMM/allfuture-trades-YYYY-MM-DD.zip`
  - funding: `https://www.okx.com/cdn/okex/traderecords/swaprate/monthly/YYYYMM/allswaprate-swaprate-YYYY-MM-DD.zip`

Helpers for OKX URL construction/download are implemented in `src/data_ingest.py`.

Quick example:

```python
from datetime import date
from src.data_ingest import download_okx_range

download_okx_range(
    start=date(2024, 8, 5),
    end=date(2024, 8, 6),
    kind="trades",
    output_dir="data/raw/okx/trades",
)
```

## Repository structure

```
src/
  data_ingest.py      # load/clean/resample market data
  binance_data.py     # Binance episode loader (spot/futures)
  bybit_data.py       # Bybit kline loader (spot/linear)
  okx_data.py         # OKX trade-archive loader (futures contracts)
  onchain.py          # on-chain validation (DefiLlama stablecoin prices)
  premium.py          # p_naive, stablecoin proxy, debiased p, depeg flag
  robust_filter.py    # p_smooth, sigma_hat, z_t, events
  statmech.py         # H_t, T_t, chi_t
  regimes.py          # stress/transient baseline change-point regime model
  hawkes.py           # optional rolling Hawkes fit + n(t)
  strategy.py         # Trade/Widen/Risk-off decision logic
  backtest.py         # naive vs gated backtest + metrics
  ablation_report.py  # single-command ablation ladder report
  execution_quality.py # slippage/resilience proxy diagnostics from bar+volume data
  plots.py            # Figure 1/2/3 exports
  pipeline.py         # end-to-end runner
  tune_gating.py      # parameter tuning for regime/strategy gating
  calibration_report.py # tuned vs baseline (Notice defaults) validation
  presentation_pack.py  # polished final tables/figures/summary pack
```

## Setup

```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Tests (CI-safe)

```bash
python -m unittest discover -s tests -p 'test_*.py' -q
```

## Expected input

Main pipeline input is a price matrix (parquet recommended, csv supported):

- path: `data/processed/episodes/yen_unwind_2024_binance/prices_matrix.csv` (default in `configs/config.yaml`, configurable)
- index: `timestamp_utc` (UTC DatetimeIndex)
- columns: symbols (e.g., `BTCUSDC-PERP`, `BTCUSDT-PERP`, `ETHUSDC-PERP`, ...)
- values: price

Loader safety behavior:

- rows with invalid timestamps are dropped with warning
- duplicate timestamps are deduplicated with `keep='last'` and warning

Target contract handling is now auto-adaptive by default:

- if configured target symbols are present, they are used directly
- if not, pipeline auto-selects the closest available USDC/USDT pair (same root/suffix preference, e.g. `BTCUSDC-SPOT` + `BTCUSDT-SPOT`)
- if no compatible USDC/USDT target pair exists, pipeline fails with an explicit data-contract error

If you start from raw files, use functions from `src/data_ingest.py` to normalize and build this matrix.

CLI option:

```bash
python -m src.data_ingest \
  --inputs "data/raw/**/*.csv" \
  --output-dir data/processed \
  --resample-rule 1min
```

## Run

```bash
python -m src.pipeline --config configs/config.yaml
```

The default config now points to a bundled matrix under `data/processed/episodes/yen_unwind_2024_binance/`, so this command is runnable out of the box.

or override the matrix path:

```bash
python -m src.pipeline --config configs/config.yaml --price-matrix data/processed/my_prices.parquet
```

If parquet engine is unavailable locally, ingestion/export falls back to csv and you can pass a `.csv` path.

## Clean submission package

To generate a recruiter-facing zip without local/editor/git artifacts:

```bash
./scripts/package_submission.sh
```

Optional output path:

```bash
./scripts/package_submission.sh /tmp/crypto_premium_submission.zip
```

Optional cleanup helper before packaging:

```bash
./scripts/clean_local_artifacts.sh
```

## One-command episode run (Binance)

Download daily Binance futures klines, build the matrix, and run the full pipeline:

```bash
python -m src.binance_data \
  --start 2024-08-05 \
  --end 2024-08-06 \
  --market futures \
  --episode-name yen_unwind_2024_binance \
  --run-pipeline \
  --skip-existing
```

For older windows (for example March 2023), Binance public data may not contain USDC quote pairs; the CLI prints an explicit availability error in that case.

This writes:

- processed data: `data/processed/episodes/yen_unwind_2024_binance/`
- per-episode reports: `reports/episodes/yen_unwind_2024_binance/`

## March 2023 USDC coverage loaders (Bybit / OKX)

Bybit spot (USDC pairs available in public API):

```bash
python -m src.bybit_data \
  --start 2023-03-10 \
  --end 2023-03-11 \
  --category spot \
  --episode-name bybit_usdc_depeg_2023 \
  --run-pipeline
```

OKX futures trade archive (auto-selects matched USDC/USDT contracts by liquidity):

```bash
python -m src.okx_data \
  --start 2023-03-10 \
  --end 2023-03-11 \
  --episode-name okx_usdc_depeg_2023 \
  --run-pipeline \
  --skip-existing
```

Example auto-selected contracts for this window:
- `BTC-USDC-230331` vs `BTC-USDT-230331`
- `ETH-USDC-230331` vs `ETH-USDT-230331`

Both commands write episode-specific outputs under `reports/episodes/<episode_name>/`.

## Gating parameter tuning (2024 episodes)

Grid-search regime + strategy gating parameters with an explicit out-of-sample holdout:

```bash
python -m src.tune_gating \
  --episodes "data/processed/episodes/*2024_binance/prices_matrix.csv" \
  --holdout-count 1 \
  --apply
```

Default tuning split behavior:

- when `--train-episodes/--test-episodes` are not provided, episodes are sorted chronologically and the last `--holdout-count` episodes are used as OOS.
- output includes both `train_*` and `oos_*` metrics plus `selection_score`.
- selection defaults to a blended score (`--oos-weight 0.5`).

Current defaults in `configs/config.yaml` include:

- `strategy.entry_k: 1.0`
- `strategy.t_widen_quantile: 0.97`
- `strategy.chi_widen_quantile: 0.99`
- `strategy.threshold_mode: expanding` (causal quantiles)
- `strategy.hawkes_threshold_mode: expanding` (causal Hawkes gating when enabled)
- `regimes.stress_quantile: 0.95`
- `regimes.recovery_quantile: 0.6`
- `regimes.threshold_mode: expanding` (causal quantiles)
- `regimes.zscore_mode: expanding` (causal robust standardization)

Reference OOS tuning table:

- `reports/tables/gating_tuning_oos_latest.csv`

If you need to reproduce legacy static-threshold behavior, switch both to:

- `strategy.threshold_mode: fixed`
- `regimes.threshold_mode: fixed`

`fixed` mode is causal: it calibrates once on the initial window (no full-series quantile look-ahead).

## On-chain validation feed

`src.pipeline` now integrates an on-chain validation frame from DefiLlama:

- `onchain_usdc_price`
- `onchain_usdt_price`
- `onchain_usdc_minus_1`
- `onchain_usdt_minus_1`
- `onchain_log_usdc_dev`
- `onchain_log_usdt_dev`
- `onchain_proxy`
- `onchain_divergence`
- `onchain_depeg_flag`

`depeg_flag` used by strategy is now the safety union:

- market-implied depeg flag from premium proxy
- on-chain depeg flag from DefiLlama prices

Configuration lives under `onchain:` in `configs/config.yaml`.

Sampling/cadence note:

- DefiLlama stablecoin prices are daily.
- `onchain_depeg_flag` persistence is therefore computed on the native daily cadence before alignment to intraday bars.
- current defaults are tuned for daily feed semantics (`onchain.depeg_delta_log: 0.005`, `onchain.depeg_min_consecutive: 1`).

Proxy availability note:

- when cross-asset USDC/USDT proxy legs are available (typical Binance perp episodes), debiased premium `p` is fully informative
- when they are unavailable for an episode, pipeline is fail-closed by default (`premium.fail_on_missing_proxy: true`) and the episode is skipped in multi-episode reports
- if you intentionally disable fail-closed behavior, use that run primarily for depeg safety/on-chain validation and state that debiased premium is not the main signal

## Execution quality diagnostics (slippage proxy + resilience)

Build execution diagnostics from `prices_resampled.csv` (price + volume bars):

```bash
python -m src.execution_quality --output-dir reports/final
```

Artifacts:

- `reports/final/execution_slippage_proxy.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_cross_quote_comparison.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_resilience.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_venue_comparison.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_quality_report.md`

Method limitation:

- this is a bar-level proxy (impact/resilience) and does **not** replace order-book snapshot slippage/depth analytics.

## Ablation report (single script)

Run the full ablation ladder:

```bash
python -m src.ablation_report \
  --price-matrix data/processed/episodes/yen_unwind_2024_binance/prices_matrix.csv \
  --output-dir reports/tables
```

Artifacts:

- `reports/tables/ablation_metrics.csv`
- `reports/tables/ablation_trade_log_<variant>.csv`
- `reports/tables/ablation_summary.md`

Variants included:

- `naive`
- `debias_only`
- `plus_robust`
- `plus_regime`
- `plus_hawkes`

## Final calibration and presentation polish

Run calibration comparison (baseline Notice defaults vs tuned config):

```bash
python -m src.calibration_report \
  --episodes "data/processed/episodes/*2024_binance/prices_matrix.csv" \
  --output-dir reports/final
```

Calibration/tuning Sharpe naming convention:

- `*_sharpe_full_raw` = full-series, non-annualized Sharpe.

Build final polished pack (consolidated CSV + comparison figures + executive summary):

```bash
python -m src.presentation_pack --output-dir reports/final --reports-root reports
```

Main final artifacts:

- `reports/final/calibration_report.md`
- `reports/final/calibration_details.csv`
- `reports/final/final_episode_metrics_long.csv`
- `reports/final/final_episode_metrics_wide.csv`
- `reports/final/final_onchain_snapshot.csv`
- `reports/final/executive_summary.md`
- `reports/final/figures/sharpe_naive_vs_gated.png`
- `reports/final/figures/pnl_naive_vs_gated.png`
- `reports/final/figures/fliprate_naive_vs_gated.png`
- `reports/final/execution_slippage_proxy.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_cross_quote_comparison.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_resilience.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_venue_comparison.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_quality_report.md`

## Outputs

- `reports/tables/metrics.csv`
- `reports/tables/trade_log_gated.csv`
- `reports/tables/trade_log_naive.csv`
- `reports/tables/signal_frame.parquet`
- `reports/figures/figure_1_timeline.png`
- `reports/figures/figure_2_panel.png`
- `reports/figures/figure_3_phase_space.png`

Metric convention in `metrics.csv`:
- `sharpe` is computed on the full `net_pnl` series and is **non-annualized** (primary score for short episodes).
- `sharpe_full_annualized` and `sharpe_active_annualized` are exported for reference only; short windows can produce unstable annualized values.
- `sharpe_active` is computed on active position bars only (`position[t-1] != 0`) for diagnostics.
- `hit_rate` is computed only on active position bars (`position[t-1] != 0`).

## Decision policy implemented

Priority order:

1. `depeg_flag == True` => `Risk-off`
2. `regime == stress` => `Risk-off`
3. Hawkes enabled:
   - fixed mode (`strategy.hawkes_threshold_mode: fixed`): `n(t) > 0.85` => `Risk-off`, `n(t) > 0.70` => `Widen`
   - adaptive mode (`strategy.hawkes_threshold_mode: expanding|rolling`): causal quantile thresholds from `n(t)` history
4. Else transient mode:
   - `Trade` only if `|m_t| > k * T_t * sigma_hat` (unit-consistent implementation)
   - `Widen` when high `T_t` or `chi_t`

Backtest execution policy (default):
- `position_mode: stateful` (multi-bar holding)
- enter on `Trade` with side from `sign(m_t)`
- hold at least `min_holding_bars` after entry, then exit on `Widen`
- exit immediately on `Risk-off` or mean-reversion (`m_t` crossing 0 versus held side)
- turnover/costs include entries, exits, and flips (`|Δposition|`)
- PnL convention: `gross_pnl[t] = position[t-1] * (-(premium[t]-premium[t-1]))` on log-premium.
  This corresponds to mean-reversion on the premium spread (`short premium` profits when premium narrows).

## Episodes currently generated in this repository

- `bybit_usdc_depeg_2023` (Bybit spot, 2023-03-10 to 2023-03-11)
- `okx_usdc_depeg_2023` (OKX futures, 2023-03-10 to 2023-03-11)
- `march_vol_2024_binance` (Binance futures, 2024-03-12 to 2024-03-13)
- `yen_unwind_2024_binance` (Binance futures, 2024-08-05 to 2024-08-06)
- `yen_followthrough_2024_binance` (Binance futures, 2024-08-07 to 2024-08-08)
- `smoke_2024_08_05` (short smoke-run artifact)

Reference episodes from the Notice spec (LUNA/UST, FTX) are part of the target checklist but are not included in the current generated artifact set.

## Notes

- This repository is intentionally modular: the notebook is a report surface, while calculations stay in `src/`.
- Current implementation is a robust baseline and is designed for quick iteration under the 1-week timeline.

Commit message:

fix: add pnl localization diagnostics and volatility-controlled execution proxy guardrails

README.md, after:

# Crypto Premium Regime Gating (Hiring Project)

This repository implements the v5 framework described in `AGENT.md` and the two notes:

- `Notice.pdf` (baseline: premium + stat-mech + regime gating)
- `Notice + Hawkes.pdf` (optional Hawkes contagion overlay)

## Scope selected from the hiring brief

This project combines:

- Stable coin analysis:
  - fair-value proxy of `USDT/USDC` spread via cross-asset replication
  - depeg detection flag (`delta_log`, consecutive windows)
  - dedicated on-chain validation feed (`onchain_proxy` from DefiLlama)
  - transmission into synthetic premium (`BTCUSDC` vs `BTCUSDT`)
- Premium analysis (robust estimation):
  - naive premium failure handling
  - robust smoothing + outlier events
  - regime detection (transient vs stress)
- Statistical mechanics features:
  - entropy `H_t`, temperature `T_t`, susceptibility `chi_t`
- Optional advanced method:
  - Hawkes branching ratio `n(t)` for stress contagion gating

## Data sources from the email

- Binance: [data.binance.vision](https://data.binance.vision/?prefix=data/)
- GateIO historical quotes: [gate.com developer docs](https://www.gate.com/developer/historical_quotes)
- Bybit historical data: [bybit history data](https://www.bybit.com/derivatives/en/history-data)
- OKX direct URLs (login bypass pattern):
  - trades: `https://www.okx.com/cdn/okex/traderecords/trades/monthly/YYYYMM/allfuture-trades-YYYY-MM-DD.zip`
  - funding: `https://www.okx.com/cdn/okex/traderecords/swaprate/monthly/YYYYMM/allswaprate-swaprate-YYYY-MM-DD.zip`

Helpers for OKX URL construction/download are implemented in `src/data_ingest.py`.

Quick example:

```python
from datetime import date
from src.data_ingest import download_okx_range

download_okx_range(
    start=date(2024, 8, 5),
    end=date(2024, 8, 6),
    kind="trades",
    output_dir="data/raw/okx/trades",
)
```

## Repository structure

```
src/
  data_ingest.py      # load/clean/resample market data
  binance_data.py     # Binance episode loader (spot/futures)
  bybit_data.py       # Bybit kline loader (spot/linear)
  okx_data.py         # OKX trade-archive loader (futures contracts)
  onchain.py          # on-chain validation (DefiLlama stablecoin prices)
  premium.py          # p_naive, stablecoin proxy, debiased p, depeg flag
  robust_filter.py    # p_smooth, sigma_hat, z_t, events
  statmech.py         # H_t, T_t, chi_t
  regimes.py          # stress/transient baseline change-point regime model
  hawkes.py           # optional rolling Hawkes fit + n(t)
  strategy.py         # Trade/Widen/Risk-off decision logic
  backtest.py         # naive vs gated backtest + metrics
  ablation_report.py  # single-command ablation ladder report
  execution_quality.py # slippage/resilience proxy diagnostics from bar+volume data
  plots.py            # Figure 1/2/3 exports
  pipeline.py         # end-to-end runner
  tune_gating.py      # parameter tuning for regime/strategy gating
  calibration_report.py # tuned vs baseline (Notice defaults) validation
  presentation_pack.py  # polished final tables/figures/summary pack
```

## Setup

```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Tests (CI-safe)

```bash
python -m unittest discover -s tests -p 'test_*.py' -q
```

## Expected input

Main pipeline input is a price matrix (parquet recommended, csv supported):

- path: `data/processed/episodes/yen_unwind_2024_binance/prices_matrix.csv` (default in `configs/config.yaml`, configurable)
- index: `timestamp_utc` (UTC DatetimeIndex)
- columns: symbols (e.g., `BTCUSDC-PERP`, `BTCUSDT-PERP`, `ETHUSDC-PERP`, ...)
- values: price

Loader safety behavior:

- rows with invalid timestamps are dropped with warning
- duplicate timestamps are deduplicated with `keep='last'` and warning
- matched USDC/USDT pairs are sanitized for one-bar stale spikes by default
  - rule: large jump + immediate opposite reversion + quiet counterpart leg
  - action: replace suspected stale point with previous bar value

Target contract handling is now auto-adaptive by default:

- if configured target symbols are present, they are used directly
- if not, pipeline auto-selects the closest available USDC/USDT pair (same root/suffix preference, e.g. `BTCUSDC-SPOT` + `BTCUSDT-SPOT`)
- if no compatible USDC/USDT target pair exists, pipeline fails with an explicit data-contract error

If you start from raw files, use functions from `src/data_ingest.py` to normalize and build this matrix.

CLI option:

```bash
python -m src.data_ingest \
  --inputs "data/raw/**/*.csv" \
  --output-dir data/processed \
  --resample-rule 1min
```

## Run

```bash
python -m src.pipeline --config configs/config.yaml
```

The default config now points to a bundled matrix under `data/processed/episodes/yen_unwind_2024_binance/`, so this command is runnable out of the box.

or override the matrix path:

```bash
python -m src.pipeline --config configs/config.yaml --price-matrix data/processed/my_prices.parquet
```

If parquet engine is unavailable locally, ingestion/export falls back to csv and you can pass a `.csv` path.

## Clean submission package

To generate a recruiter-facing zip without local/editor/git artifacts:

```bash
./scripts/package_submission.sh
```

Optional output path:

```bash
./scripts/package_submission.sh /tmp/crypto_premium_submission.zip
```

Optional cleanup helper before packaging:

```bash
./scripts/clean_local_artifacts.sh
```

## One-command episode run (Binance)

Download daily Binance futures klines, build the matrix, and run the full pipeline:

```bash
python -m src.binance_data \
  --start 2024-08-05 \
  --end 2024-08-06 \
  --market futures \
  --episode-name yen_unwind_2024_binance \
  --run-pipeline \
  --skip-existing
```

For older windows (for example March 2023), Binance public data may not contain USDC quote pairs; the CLI prints an explicit availability error in that case.

This writes:

- processed data: `data/processed/episodes/yen_unwind_2024_binance/`
- per-episode reports: `reports/episodes/yen_unwind_2024_binance/`

## March 2023 USDC coverage loaders (Bybit / OKX)

Bybit spot (USDC pairs available in public API):

```bash
python -m src.bybit_data \
  --start 2023-03-10 \
  --end 2023-03-11 \
  --category spot \
  --episode-name bybit_usdc_depeg_2023 \
  --run-pipeline
```

OKX futures trade archive (auto-selects matched USDC/USDT contracts by liquidity):

```bash
python -m src.okx_data \
  --start 2023-03-10 \
  --end 2023-03-11 \
  --episode-name okx_usdc_depeg_2023 \
  --run-pipeline \
  --skip-existing
```

Example auto-selected contracts for this window:
- `BTC-USDC-230331` vs `BTC-USDT-230331`
- `ETH-USDC-230331` vs `ETH-USDT-230331`

Both commands write episode-specific outputs under `reports/episodes/<episode_name>/`.

## Gating parameter tuning (2024 episodes)

Grid-search regime + strategy gating parameters with an explicit out-of-sample holdout:

```bash
python -m src.tune_gating \
  --episodes "data/processed/episodes/*2024_binance/prices_matrix.csv" \
  --holdout-count 1 \
  --apply
```

Default tuning split behavior:

- when `--train-episodes/--test-episodes` are not provided, episodes are sorted chronologically and the last `--holdout-count` episodes are used as OOS.
- output includes both `train_*` and `oos_*` metrics plus `selection_score`.
- selection defaults to a blended score (`--oos-weight 0.5`).

Current defaults in `configs/config.yaml` include:

- `strategy.entry_k: 1.0`
- `strategy.t_widen_quantile: 0.97`
- `strategy.chi_widen_quantile: 0.99`
- `strategy.threshold_mode: expanding` (causal quantiles)
- `strategy.hawkes_threshold_mode: expanding` (causal Hawkes gating when enabled)
- `regimes.stress_quantile: 0.95`
- `regimes.recovery_quantile: 0.6`
- `regimes.threshold_mode: expanding` (causal quantiles)
- `regimes.zscore_mode: expanding` (causal robust standardization)

Reference OOS tuning table:

- `reports/tables/gating_tuning_oos_latest.csv`

If you need to reproduce legacy static-threshold behavior, switch both to:

- `strategy.threshold_mode: fixed`
- `regimes.threshold_mode: fixed`

`fixed` mode is causal: it calibrates once on the initial window (no full-series quantile look-ahead).

## On-chain validation feed

`src.pipeline` now integrates an on-chain validation frame from DefiLlama:

- `onchain_usdc_price`
- `onchain_usdt_price`
- `onchain_usdc_minus_1`
- `onchain_usdt_minus_1`
- `onchain_log_usdc_dev`
- `onchain_log_usdt_dev`
- `onchain_proxy`
- `onchain_divergence`
- `onchain_depeg_flag`

`depeg_flag` used by strategy is now the safety union:

- market-implied depeg flag from premium proxy
- on-chain depeg flag from DefiLlama prices

Configuration lives under `onchain:` in `configs/config.yaml`.

Sampling/cadence note:

- DefiLlama stablecoin prices are daily.
- `onchain_depeg_flag` persistence is therefore computed on the native daily cadence before alignment to intraday bars.
- current defaults are tuned for daily feed semantics (`onchain.depeg_delta_log: 0.005`, `onchain.depeg_min_consecutive: 1`).

Proxy availability note:

- when cross-asset USDC/USDT proxy legs are available (typical Binance perp episodes), debiased premium `p` is fully informative
- when they are unavailable for an episode, pipeline is fail-closed by default (`premium.fail_on_missing_proxy: true`) and the episode is skipped in multi-episode reports
- if you intentionally disable fail-closed behavior, use that run primarily for depeg safety/on-chain validation and state that debiased premium is not the main signal

## Execution quality diagnostics (slippage proxy + resilience)

Build execution diagnostics from `prices_resampled.csv` (price + volume bars):

```bash
python -m src.execution_quality --output-dir reports/final
```

Artifacts:

- `reports/final/execution_slippage_proxy.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_cross_quote_comparison.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_resilience.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_venue_comparison.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_quality_report.md`

Method limitation:

- this is a bar-level proxy (impact/resilience) and does **not** replace order-book snapshot slippage/depth analytics.
- volatility control is reported via excess and normalized impact proxies (raw bps, excess bps, normalized by local median abs-return).
- cross-venue comparison is segmented by `market_type` (`spot` vs `derivatives`) to avoid non-homogeneous venue ranking.
- do not infer a definitive "best liquidity venue/quote" from this section without L2 order-book replay and instrument/fee/funding normalization.

## Ablation report (single script)

Run the full ablation ladder:

```bash
python -m src.ablation_report \
  --price-matrix data/processed/episodes/yen_unwind_2024_binance/prices_matrix.csv \
  --output-dir reports/tables
```

Artifacts:

- `reports/tables/ablation_metrics.csv`
- `reports/tables/ablation_trade_log_<variant>.csv`
- `reports/tables/ablation_summary.md`

Variants included:

- `naive`
- `debias_only`
- `plus_robust`
- `plus_regime`
- `plus_hawkes`

## Final calibration and presentation polish

Run calibration comparison (baseline Notice defaults vs tuned config):

```bash
python -m src.calibration_report \
  --episodes "data/processed/episodes/*2024_binance/prices_matrix.csv" \
  --output-dir reports/final
```

Calibration/tuning Sharpe naming convention:

- `*_sharpe_full_raw` = full-series, non-annualized Sharpe.

Build final polished pack (consolidated CSV + comparison figures + executive summary):

```bash
python -m src.presentation_pack --output-dir reports/final --reports-root reports
```

Main final artifacts:

- `reports/final/calibration_report.md`
- `reports/final/calibration_details.csv`
- `reports/final/final_episode_metrics_long.csv`
- `reports/final/final_episode_metrics_wide.csv`
- `reports/final/final_onchain_snapshot.csv`
- `reports/final/executive_summary.md`
- `reports/final/figures/sharpe_naive_vs_gated.png`
- `reports/final/figures/pnl_naive_vs_gated.png`
- `reports/final/figures/fliprate_naive_vs_gated.png`
- `reports/final/execution_slippage_proxy.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_cross_quote_comparison.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_resilience.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_venue_comparison.csv`
- `reports/final/execution_quality_report.md`

## Outputs

- `reports/tables/metrics.csv`
- `reports/tables/trade_log_gated.csv`
- `reports/tables/trade_log_naive.csv`
- `reports/tables/signal_frame.parquet`
- `reports/figures/figure_1_timeline.png`
- `reports/figures/figure_2_panel.png`
- `reports/figures/figure_3_phase_space.png`

Metric convention in `metrics.csv`:
- `sharpe` is computed on the full `net_pnl` series and is **non-annualized** (primary score for short episodes).
- `sharpe_full_annualized` and `sharpe_active_annualized` are exported for reference only; short windows can produce unstable annualized values.
- `sharpe_active` is computed on active position bars only (`position[t-1] != 0`) for diagnostics.
- `hit_rate` is computed only on active position bars (`position[t-1] != 0`).

## Decision policy implemented

Priority order:

1. `depeg_flag == True` => `Risk-off`
2. `regime == stress` => `Risk-off`
3. Hawkes enabled:
   - fixed mode (`strategy.hawkes_threshold_mode: fixed`): `n(t) > 0.85` => `Risk-off`, `n(t) > 0.70` => `Widen`
   - adaptive mode (`strategy.hawkes_threshold_mode: expanding|rolling`): causal quantile thresholds from `n(t)` history
4. Else transient mode:
   - `Trade` only if `|m_t| > k * T_t * sigma_hat` (unit-consistent implementation)
   - `Widen` when high `T_t` or `chi_t`

Backtest execution policy (default):
- `position_mode: stateful` (multi-bar holding)
- enter on `Trade` with side from `sign(m_t)`
- hold at least `min_holding_bars` after entry, then exit on `Widen`
- exit immediately on `Risk-off` or mean-reversion (`m_t` crossing 0 versus held side)
- turnover/costs include entries, exits, and flips (`|Δposition|`)
- PnL convention: `gross_pnl[t] = position[t-1] * (-(premium[t]-premium[t-1]))` on log-premium.
  This corresponds to mean-reversion on the premium spread (`short premium` profits when premium narrows).

## Episodes currently generated in this repository

- `bybit_usdc_depeg_2023` (Bybit spot, 2023-03-10 to 2023-03-11)
- `okx_usdc_depeg_2023` (OKX futures, 2023-03-10 to 2023-03-11)
- `march_vol_2024_binance` (Binance futures, 2024-03-12 to 2024-03-13)
- `yen_unwind_2024_binance` (Binance futures, 2024-08-05 to 2024-08-06)
- `yen_followthrough_2024_binance` (Binance futures, 2024-08-07 to 2024-08-08)
- `smoke_2024_08_05` (short smoke-run artifact)

Reference episodes from the Notice spec (LUNA/UST, FTX) are part of the target checklist but are not included in the current generated artifact set.

## Notes

- This repository is intentionally modular: the notebook is a report surface, while calculations stay in `src/`.
- Current implementation is a robust baseline and is designed for quick iteration under the 1-week timeline.
